---
tags:
  - JavaScript
  - event
  - DOM
---
# Events
- Events are actions that occur on your webpage. 
    - eg. mouse-clicks, or key-presses, or loading a page.
- We can use JavaScript to listen and react to these events
    - useful pre-built events: [[Commonly Useful Events]], [[Mouse Events]], [[Keyboard events]] 
## Triggering Events w Functions
- can use a function to trigger another event via creating a custom event
    - ? does this have to trigger off code based events already occurring, or can it be linked w user triggered events


## Event Constructor
- The `Event` is the base type of `UIEvent`, which is the base for other specific event types, like:
    - MouseEvent, TouchEvent, FocusEvent, and KeyboardEvent
    - it's good practice to use the specialized event constructor (eg. MouseEvent) instead of the generic `Event` because these constructors provide more information specific to their event types.
- To create a new Event:
    - - Syntax: `let event = new Event(type, [,options]);
        - *type* = string to identify the event type, eg. 'click'
        - *options* =  object w 2 optional properties
            - *bubbles*: is a boolean value that deterrmines if it bubbles or not (true=bubbles)
            - *cancelable*: boolean value that specifies if event can be cancelled (true=can cancel)
            - default is false to both!
    - example: `{js icon} let clickEvent = new Event('click');
## dispatchEvent()
- Generally events are generated by user actions, but they can also be generated by code (without user input).
    - To create an event programmatically:
        - First, create a new `Event` object using `Event`constructor
        - Then, trigger the event using `element.dispatchEvent(EventName) `method
- - if the event comes from user actions, the `event.isTrusted` property is set to `true`. If generated by code, it is set to `false`

## Example from creation to dispatch
```html  
<button class="btn">Test</button>
```
```js
let btn = document.querySelector('.btn');

 btn.addEventListener('click', function () {
        alert('Mouse Clicked');
 });

let clickEvent = new Event('click');
btn.dispatchEvent(clickEvent);
```

[[Event Listeners]]
[[Event Bubbling]]
[[Event delegation]]
[[Event Properties & Methods]]
- [[Commonly Useful Events]]
- [[Mouse Events]]
- [[Keyboard events]]